README.md, before:

# Re-imagining *Beyond Words* with Deep Learning

## By Benjamin Charles Germain Lee (LOC Innovator-in-Residence, 2020)


## Introduction

This code base explores using the <a href="http://beyondwords.labs.loc.gov/#/">*Beyond Words*</a> crowdsourced annotations of photographs, illustrations, comics, cartoons, and maps from <a href="https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/">*Chronicling America*</a> to finetune a pre-trained object detection model to detect visual content in historical newspaper scans. This finetuned model can then be used as the first step in a pipeline for automating the extraction of visual content from *Chronicling America*, as well as captions and corresponding textual content from the METZ/ALTO OCR of each *Chronicling America* page. This code base also contains a script for visualizing the extracted photographs, illustrations, comics, cartoons, and maps from *Chronicling America* using ResNet-18 embeddings and T-SNE.


## Dataset

The *Beyond Words* dataset for photograph, illustration, comic, cartoon, and map detection in historical newspaper scans, is formatted according to the <a href="http://cocodataset.org/#format-data">COCO</a> standard for object detection and can be found in <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/tree/master/beyond_words_data">/beyond_words_data/</a>. The images are stored in <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/tree/master/beyond_words_data/images">/beyond_words_data/images/</a>, and the JSON can be found in <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/trainval.json">/beyond_words_data/trainval.json</a>.   The dataset contains 3,437 images with 6,732 verified annotations.  Here is a breakdown of categories:

* Photographs: 4,193
* Illustrations: 1,028
* Maps: 79
* Comics/Cartoons: 1,139
* Editorial Cartoons: 293


For an 80\%-20\% split, see <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/trainval_80_percent.json">/beyond_words_data/trainval_80_percent.json</a> and <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/test_80_percent.json">/beyond_words_data/test_80_percent.json</a>.  Lastly, the original annotations from the *Beyond Words* site can be found at <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/beyond_words.txt">/beyond_words_data/beyond_words.txt</a>.

To construct the dataset using updated annotations, first update the annotations file, then run the script <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/process_beyond_words_images_COCO.py">process_beyond_words_images_COCO.py</a>.  This file also contains some commented-out, vestigial code for creating pixel masks to work with the <a href="https://dhsegment.readthedocs.io/en/latest/start/demo.html">dhSegment</a> format.

## Detecting and Extracting Visual Content from Historic Newspaper Scans

With this dataset fully constructed, the next step is to train a deep learning model to identify visual content and classify it according to the *Beyond Words* taxonomy (photograph, illustration, comics/cartoon, editorial cartoon, and map).  The approach that I've taken is to finetune a pre-trained Faster-RCNN impelementation in a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2">Detectron2</a>'s <a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2/blob/master/MODEL_ZOO.md">Model Zoo</a> in PyTorch.  

The Google Colab notebook "\_" contains code for finetuning different pre-trained Faster-RCNN implementations from <a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2">Detectron2</a>'s <a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2/blob/master/MODEL_ZOO.md">Model Zoo</a> and benchmarking them. This file saves the predicted bounding boxes for each scan as a JSON file.

## Extracting Captions and Textual Content using METZ/ALTO OCR

Now that we have a finetuned model for extracting visual content from newspaper scans in *Chronicling America*, we can leverage the OCR of each scan to weakly supervise captions and corresponding textual content. Because *Beyond Words* volunteers were instructed to draw bounding boxes over corresponding textual content, the finetuned model has learned how to do this as well.  As a baseline approach, we can find all of the textual content that falls within each predicted bounding box. Note that this is precisely what happens in *Beyond Words* during the "Transcribe" step, where volunteers correct the OCR within each bounding box.  

The script "\_" utilizes the predicted bounding boxes in JSON format to extract textual content within each predicted bounding box from the METZ/ALTO OCR XML file for each *Chronicling America* page.  The textual content is then added to the JSON. This script also uses PIL to crop the predicted bounding boxes from the newspaper scans to produce a set of extracted visual content.

## Visualizing a Day in Newspaper History

Using the <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/chronam-get-images">chronam-get-images</a> repo, we can pull down all of the *Chronicling America* content for a specific day in history (or, a larger date range if you're interested - the world is your oyster!).  Running the above scripts, we've gone from a set of scans and OCR XML files to extracted visual content. How do we then visualize this content?

One answer is to use image embeddings and T-SNE to cluster the images in 2D.  To accomplish this, I've used <a href="https://github.com/christiansafka/img2vec">img2vec</a>, a Python package that produces embeddings for images using ResNet-18 and AlexNet.  Here, I've chosen to use the 512-dimensional embeddings from ResNet-18 produced by feeding in an image and grabbing the weights in the last hidden layer.  Using sklearn's implementation of T-SNE, it's easy to perform dimensionality reduction down to 2D - perfect for a visualization. We can then visualize a day in history!  Here's an example: ...


The script "\_" contains all of my code for generating visualizations.  Note that it requires <a href="https://github.com/christiansafka/img2vec">img2vec</a> and scikit-learn.

(This README will be updated as new commits are added).

Commit message:

adding table with performance metrics

README.md, after:

# Re-imagining *Beyond Words* with Deep Learning

## By Benjamin Charles Germain Lee (LOC Innovator-in-Residence, 2020)


## Introduction

This code base explores using the <a href="http://beyondwords.labs.loc.gov/#/">*Beyond Words*</a> crowdsourced annotations of photographs, illustrations, comics, cartoons, and maps from <a href="https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/">*Chronicling America*</a> to finetune a pre-trained object detection model to detect visual content in historical newspaper scans. This finetuned model can then be used as the first step in a pipeline for automating the extraction of visual content from *Chronicling America*, as well as captions and corresponding textual content from the METZ/ALTO OCR of each *Chronicling America* page. This code base also contains a script for visualizing the extracted photographs, illustrations, comics, cartoons, and maps from *Chronicling America* using ResNet-18 embeddings and T-SNE.


## Dataset

The *Beyond Words* dataset for photograph, illustration, comic, cartoon, and map detection in historical newspaper scans, is formatted according to the <a href="http://cocodataset.org/#format-data">COCO</a> standard for object detection and can be found in <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/tree/master/beyond_words_data">/beyond_words_data/</a>. The images are stored in <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/tree/master/beyond_words_data/images">/beyond_words_data/images/</a>, and the JSON can be found in <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/trainval.json">/beyond_words_data/trainval.json</a>.   The dataset contains 3,437 images with 6,732 verified annotations.  Here is a breakdown of categories:

* Photographs: 4,193
* Illustrations: 1,028
* Maps: 79
* Comics/Cartoons: 1,139
* Editorial Cartoons: 293


For an 80\%-20\% split, see <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/trainval_80_percent.json">/beyond_words_data/trainval_80_percent.json</a> and <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/test_80_percent.json">/beyond_words_data/test_80_percent.json</a>.  Lastly, the original annotations from the *Beyond Words* site can be found at <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/beyond_words_data/beyond_words.txt">/beyond_words_data/beyond_words.txt</a>.

To construct the dataset using updated annotations, first update the annotations file, then run the script <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/beyond_words/blob/master/process_beyond_words_images_COCO.py">process_beyond_words_images_COCO.py</a>.  This file also contains some commented-out, vestigial code for creating pixel masks to work with the <a href="https://dhsegment.readthedocs.io/en/latest/start/demo.html">dhSegment</a> format.

## Detecting and Extracting Visual Content from Historic Newspaper Scans

With this dataset fully constructed, the next step is to train a deep learning model to identify visual content and classify it according to the *Beyond Words* taxonomy (photograph, illustration, comics/cartoon, editorial cartoon, and map).  The approach that I've taken is to finetune a pre-trained Faster-RCNN impelementation in a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2">Detectron2</a>'s <a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2/blob/master/MODEL_ZOO.md">Model Zoo</a> in PyTorch.  

The Google Colab notebook "\_" contains code for finetuning different pre-trained Faster-RCNN implementations from <a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2">Detectron2</a>'s <a href="https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2/blob/master/MODEL_ZOO.md">Model Zoo</a> and benchmarking them. This file saves the predicted bounding boxes for each scan as a JSON file.

Here are performance metrics on two pretrained Faster-RCNN models from Detectron2's Model Zoo (all metrics reported are on the 20\% validation set in the repo using a single NVIDIA Tesla K80 GPU provided by Colab):

| Model | average precision | inference time per image |
| ----- | ----------------- | ------------------------ |
|faster\_rcnn\_R\_50\_FPN\_3x | --- | 0.1 s / img|
| faster\_rcnn\_X\_101\_32x8d\_FPN\_3x | 57.4 \% | 0.25 s / img |

## Extracting Captions and Textual Content using METZ/ALTO OCR

Now that we have a finetuned model for extracting visual content from newspaper scans in *Chronicling America*, we can leverage the OCR of each scan to weakly supervise captions and corresponding textual content. Because *Beyond Words* volunteers were instructed to draw bounding boxes over corresponding textual content, the finetuned model has learned how to do this as well.  As a baseline approach, we can find all of the textual content that falls within each predicted bounding box. Note that this is precisely what happens in *Beyond Words* during the "Transcribe" step, where volunteers correct the OCR within each bounding box.  

The script "\_" utilizes the predicted bounding boxes in JSON format to extract textual content within each predicted bounding box from the METZ/ALTO OCR XML file for each *Chronicling America* page.  The textual content is then added to the JSON. This script also uses PIL to crop the predicted bounding boxes from the newspaper scans to produce a set of extracted visual content.

## Visualizing a Day in Newspaper History

Using the <a href="https://github.com/bcglee/chronam-get-images">chronam-get-images</a> repo, we can pull down all of the *Chronicling America* content for a specific day in history (or, a larger date range if you're interested - the world is your oyster!).  Running the above scripts, we've gone from a set of scans and OCR XML files to extracted visual content. How do we then visualize this content?

One answer is to use image embeddings and T-SNE to cluster the images in 2D.  To accomplish this, I've used <a href="https://github.com/christiansafka/img2vec">img2vec</a>, a Python package that produces embeddings for images using ResNet-18 and AlexNet.  Here, I've chosen to use the 512-dimensional embeddings from ResNet-18 produced by feeding in an image and grabbing the weights in the last hidden layer.  Using sklearn's implementation of T-SNE, it's easy to perform dimensionality reduction down to 2D - perfect for a visualization. We can then visualize a day in history!  Here's an example: ...


The script "\_" contains all of my code for generating visualizations.  Note that it requires <a href="https://github.com/christiansafka/img2vec">img2vec</a> and scikit-learn.

(This README will be updated as new commits are added).
